ZeroGPU go brrr blogpost (#3040)
huggingface/blog: zerogpu-aoti.md

ZeroGPU takes a just-in-time approach to GPU initialization: instead of setting up the main process on CUDA, fork it, set up the fork on CUDA, perform task(s) and finally let the fork be killed when GPU needs to be released.

This means that:

- When the app does not receive traffic, it doesn't use any GPU
- When it is actually performing a task, it will use one GPU
- It can use multiple GPUs as needed to perform tasks concurrently

Thanks to `spaces` package, the only code change needed to get this behaviour is as follows:

```diff
  import gradio as gr
+ import spaces
  from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline

  pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(...).to('cuda')

+ @spaces.GPU
  def generate(prompt):
      return pipe(prompt).images

  gr.Interface(generate, "text", "gallery").launch()

```

By importing `spaces` package and adding `@spaces.GPU` decorator, we:

- Intercept PyTorch API calls to postpone CUDA operations
- Make the decorated function run in a fork when later called
- (Call an internal API to make the right device visible to the fork but this is not in the scope of this blogpost)

> 

Reviewer: Nice intro to ZeroGPU. It would be awesome if we can a few words about common issues with ZeroGPU, for instance, the input and output of the annotated function needs to be on CPU etc. IIUC?

ZeroGPU lets anyone spin up powerful **Nvidia H200** hardware in Hugging Face Spaces without keeping a GPU locked for idle traffic.
It’s efficient, flexible, and ideal for demos but it doesn’t always make full use of everything the GPU and CUDA stack can offer.
Generating images or videos can take a significant amount of time. Being able to squeeze out more performance, taking advantage of the H200 hardware, does matter in this case.

This is where PyTorch ahead-of-time (AoT) compilation comes in. Instead of compiling models on the fly (which doesn’t play nicely with ZeroGPU’s short-lived processes), AoT lets you optimize once and reload instantly. 

**The result**: snappier demos and a smoother experience, with speedups ranging from __1.3×–1.8×__ on models like Flux, Wan, and LTX 🔥

In this post, we’ll show how to wire up Ahead-of-Time (AoT) compilation in ZeroGPU Spaces. We'll explore advanced tricks like FP8 quantization and dynamic shapes, and share working demos you can try right away. If you cannot wait, we invite you to check out some ZeroGPU-powered demos on the [zerogpu-aoti](https://huggingface.co/zerogpu-aoti) organization.

> [!TIP]

> > Only [Pro](https://huggingface.co/pro) users and [Team / Enterprise](https://huggingface.co/enterprise) org members can create ZeroGPU Spaces while anyone can freely use them (Pro, Team and Enterprise users get **8x** more daily GPU quota)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [Pro](https://huggingface.co/pro) users and [Team / Enterprise](https://huggingface.co/enterprise) org members can create ZeroGPU Spaces, while anyone can freely use them (Pro, Team and Enterprise users get **8x** more ZeroGPU quota)
```

just nits

And we can then proceed with the rest of the steps as outlined above. Using quantization provides another **1.2x** of speedup.

### Dynamic shapes

Images and videos can come in different shapes and sizes. Hence, it’s important to also account for shape dynamism when performing AoT compilation. The primitives provided by `torch.export.export` make it easily configurable to provide what inputs should be treated accordingly for dynamic shapes, as shown below.

For the case of Flux.1-Dev transformer, changes in different image resolutions will affect two of its `forward` arguments: 

- `hidden_states`: The noisy input latents, which the transformer is supposed to denoise. It’s a 3D tensor, representing `batch_size, flattened_latent_dim, embed_dim`. When the batch size is fixed,  it’s the `flattened_latent_dim` that will change for any changes made to image resolutions.
- `img_ids`: A 2D array of encoded pixel coordinates having a shape of `height * width, 3`. In this case, we want to make `height * width` dynamic.

We start by defining a range in which we want to let the (latent) image resolutions vary.

> To derive these value ranges, we inspected the shapes of [`hidden_states`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/0ff1aa910cf3d87193af79ec1ae4487be542e872/src/diffusers/pipelines/flux/pipeline_flux.py#L920) in the pipeline with respect to varied image resolutions. The exact values are model-dependent and require manual inspection and some intuition. For Flux.1-Dev, we ended up with:

Reviewer 3: I feel like this may still be a bit too vague, but not strong opinion on how to approach it differently

        return compiled_landscape(*args, **kwargs)
    else:
        return compiled_portrait(*args, **kwargs)

spaces.aoti_apply(combined, pipeline.transformer)
```

You can see a fully working example of this paradigm in Wan 2.2 Space: [https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/wan2-2-fp8da-aoti-faster](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/wan2-2-fp8da-aoti-faster/blob/main/optimization.py)

### FlashAttention-3

Since the ZeroGPU hardware and CUDA drivers are perfectly compatible with Flash-Attention 3 (FA3), we can use it in our ZeroGPU Spaces to speed things up even further. FA3 works with ahead-of-time compilation. So, this is ideal for our case.

Compiling and building FA3 from source can take several minutes, and this process is hardware-dependent. As users, we wouldn’t want to lose precious ZeroGPU compute hours. This is where Hugging Face [`kernels` library](https://github.com/huggingface/kernels) comes to the rescue. It provides access to pre-built kernels that are compatible for a given hardware. For example, when we try to run:

```python
from kernels import get_kernel

vllm_flash_attn3 = get_kernel("kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3")
```

> It tries to load a kernel from the [`kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3`](https://huggingface.co/kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3) repository, which is compatible with the current setup. Otherwise, it will error out for incompatibility issues. Luckily for us, this works seamlessly on the ZeroGPU Spaces. This means we can leverage the power of FA3 on ZeroGPU, using the `kernels` library.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It tries to load a kernel from the [`kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3`](https://huggingface.co/kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3) repository, which is compatible with the current setup. Otherwise, it will error out due to incompatibility issues. Luckily for us, this works seamlessly on the ZeroGPU Spaces. This means we can leverage the power of FA3 on ZeroGPU, using the `kernels` library.
```

💡 Check out [this Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/FLUX.1-Kontext-Dev-fp8-dynamic) that shows how to use both quantization and dynamic shapes during the export step.
</div>

### Multi-compile / shared weights

Dynamic shapes is sometimes not enough when dynamism is too important.

This is, for instance, the case with the Wan family of video generation models if you want your compiled model to generate different resolutions.
One thing can be done in this case: compile one model per resolution while keeping the model parameters shared:

``` python
@spaces.GPU
def compile():
    with spaces.aoti_capture(pipeline.transformer) as call_landscape:
        pipeline("prompt", width=832, height=480)
    with spaces.aoti_capture(pipeline.transformer) as call_portrait:
        pipeline("prompt", width=480, height=832)

    exported_landscape = torch.export.export(model, args=call_landscape.args, kwargs=call_landscape.kwargs)
    exported_portrait = torch.export.export(model, args=call_portrait.args, kwargs=call_portrait.kwargs)

    compiled_landscape = spaces.aoti_compile(exported_landscape)
    compiled_portrait = spaces.aoti_compile(exported_portrait)

> 	# The following line is very important as weights would duplicate when returning back outside of `@spaces.GPU` otherwise

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	# The following line is very important, otherwise weights would duplicate when returning outside of `@spaces.GPU`
```
is this what you mean?

- Just-in-time with `torch.compile`
- Ahead-of-time with `torch.export` + `AOTInductor`

[`torch.compile`](https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) works great in standard environments: it compiles your model the first time it runs, and reuses the optimized version for subsequent calls.

```diff
  from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline

  pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(...).to('cuda')
+ pipe.transformer.compile()

  pipe(prompt="photo of a dog looking like a pilot")
```

However, on ZeroGPU, given that the process is freshly spun up for (almost) every GPU task, it means that `torch.compile` can’t efficiently re-use compilation and is thus forced to rely on its [filesystem cache](https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/torch_compile_caching_tutorial.html#modular-caching-of-torchdynamo-torchinductor-and-triton) to restore compiled models. Depending on the model being compiled, this process takes from a few dozen seconds to a couple of minutes, which is way too much for practical GPU tasks in Spaces.

<div style="background-color: #e6f9e6; padding: 16px 32px; outline: 2px solid; border-radius: 5px;">

> 💡 We only compile the transformer since, in these generative models, the transformer (or more generally, the denoiser) is the most computationally heavy component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
💡 In the above example, we only compile the transformer since, in these generative models, the transformer (or more generally, the denoiser) is the most computationally heavy component.
```

---

> title: "Make your ZeroGPU Spaces go brrr with PyTorch ahead-of-time compilation"

Reviewer 5: I kind of like it spelled out as it's more descriptive, I would maybe shorten by omitting PyTorch: 

```suggestion
title: "Make your ZeroGPU Spaces go brrr with ahead-of-time compilation"
```

> title: "Make your ZeroGPU Spaces go brrr with PyTorch ahead-of-time compilation"

Reviewer 6: Let's go with Poli's one!

> title: "Make your ZeroGPU Spaces go brrr with PyTorch ahead-of-time compilation"

Reviewer 6: Or @pcuenca's https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/3040#discussion_r2312008957

thumbnail: /blog/assets/zerogpu-aoti/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: cbensimon
- user: sayakpaul
- user: linoyts
- user: multimodalart
date: 2025-09-01
---

> # Make your ZeroGPU Spaces go brrr with PyTorch ahead-of-time compilation

Reviewer 6: Yeah I like that better!

ZeroGPU lets anyone spin up powerful H200s in Hugging Face Spaces without keeping a GPU locked for idle traffic.
It’s efficient, flexible, and ideal for demos but it doesn’t always make full use of everything the GPU and CUDA stack can offer.
Generating images or videos can take a significant amount of time. Being able to squeeze out more performance, taking advantage of the H200 hardware, does matter in this case.

This is where PyTorch ahead-of-time (AoT) compilation comes in. Instead of compiling models on the fly (which doesn’t play nicely with ZeroGPU’s short-lived processes), AoT lets you optimize once and reload instantly. 

**The result**: snappier demos and a smoother experience, with speedups ranging from __1.3×–1.8×__ on models like Flux, Wan, and LTX.

> In this post, we’ll show how to wire up AoT compilation in your own ZeroGPU Spaces, explore advanced tricks like FP8 quantization and dynamic shapes, and share working demos you can try right away. If you cannot wait, we invite you to check out some ZeroGPU-powered demos on the [zerogpu-aoti](https://huggingface.co/zerogpu-aoti) organization.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In this post, we’ll show how to wire up Ahead-of-Time (AoT) compilation in ZeroGPU Spaces. We'll explore advanced tricks like FP8 quantization and dynamic shapes, and share working demos you can try right away. If you cannot wait, we invite you to check out some ZeroGPU-powered demos on the [zerogpu-aoti](https://huggingface.co/zerogpu-aoti) organization.
```

making the sentence less ambiguous

This means that:

- When the app does not receive traffic, it doesn't use any GPU
- When it is actually performing a task, it will use one GPU
- It can use multiple GPUs as needed to perform tasks concurrently

Thanks to `spaces` package, the only code change needed to get this behaviour is as follows:

```diff
  import gradio as gr
+ import spaces
  from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline

  pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(...).to('cuda')

+ @spaces.GPU
  def generate(prompt):
      return pipe(prompt).images

  gr.Interface(generate, "text", "gallery").launch()

```

By importing `spaces` package and adding `@spaces.GPU` decorator, we:

- Intercept PyTorch API calls to postpone CUDA operations
- Make the decorated function run in a fork when later called
- (Call an internal API to make the right device visible to the fork but this is not in the scope of this blogpost)

## PyTorch compilation

In the era of large generative models, users can often run into latency issues. Imagine having to wait forever just to generate a 5-second video clip.

> 

Reviewer 6: I think it is beneficial to keep it to make the users aware of how slow the process can be. Perhaps a bit reworded (but I won't definitely completely remove it):

```
In the era of large generative models, users can often run into latency issues. SoTA models like Wan can take upto 15-20 mins even for a 5 seconds' long clip, when unoptimized.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: I see the point. I wanted to have something more explicit but the vibe of the post already maybe makes it clear. Okay with it being discarded.

```diff
  from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline

  pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(...).to('cuda')
+ pipe.transformer.compile()

  pipe(prompt="photo of a dog looking like a pilot")
```

However, on ZeroGPU, given that the process is freshly spun up for (almost) every GPU task, it means that `torch.compile` can’t efficiently re-use compilation and is thus forced to rely on its [filesystem cache](https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/torch_compile_caching_tutorial.html#modular-caching-of-torchdynamo-torchinductor-and-triton) to restore compiled models. Depending on the model being compiled, this process takes from a few dozen seconds to a couple of minutes, which is way too much for practical GPU tasks in Spaces.

<div style="background-color: #e6f9e6; padding: 16px 32px; outline: 2px solid; border-radius: 5px;">
💡 In the above example, we only compile the transformer since, in these generative models, the transformer (or more generally, the denoiser) is the most computationally heavy component.
</div>

This is where **ahead-of-time (AoT) compilation** shines.

> With AoT, we can export a compiled model once, save it, and later reload it instantly in any process, which is exactly what we need for ZeroGPU. This helps us reduce framework overhead and also eliminate cold-start timings typically incurred in just-in-time compilation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With AoT, we can export a compiled model once, save it, and later reload it instantly in any process, which is exactly what we need for ZeroGPU. This helps us reduce framework overhead and also eliminates cold-start timings typically incurred in just-in-time compilation.
```

But how can we do ahead-of-time compilation on ZeroGPU? Let’s dive in.

## Ahead-of-time compilation on ZeroGPU

If you want to learn more about how AoT compilation is supported in PyTorch, you can read the [PyTorch tutorial](https://docs.pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/torch_export_aoti_python.html) on ahead-of-time compilation. But we will start from scratch in this post.

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to place the link later and just dive in into the example.

Reviewer 6: Ah got it yeah makes sense.

```python
with spaces.aoti_capture(pipeline.transformer) as call:
    pipe("arbitrary example prompt")
```

When used as a context manager like so, it allows capturing the call of any callable (`pipeline.transformer`, in our case), cancel it and put the captured input values inside `call.args` and `call.kwargs`.

### 2. Exporting the model

Now that we have example args and kwargs for our transformer component, we can export it to a PyTorch [`ExportedProgram`](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/export.html#torch.export.ExportedProgram) by using [`torch.export.export`](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/export.html#torch.export.export) utility:

```python
exported_transformer = torch.export.export(
    pipeline.transformer,
    args=call.args,
    kwargs=call.kwargs,
)
```

An exported PyTorch program is a computation graph that represents the tensor computations along with the original model parameter values.

### 3. Compiling the exported model

> Once the model is exported, compiling is pretty straightforward.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Once the model is exported, compiling it is pretty straightforward.
```

> A traditional AoT compilation in PyTorch often requires saving the model on disk so it can be later reloaded. In our case, we’ll use another small helper coming in the `spaces` package: `spaces.aoti_compile`. This is a tiny wrapper around `torch._inductor.aot_compile` that manages saving and lazy-loading the model as needed. It is meant to be used like:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A traditional AoT compilation in PyTorch often requires saving the model on disk so it can be later reloaded. In our case, we’ll leverage a helper function part of the `spaces` package: `spaces.aoti_compile`. It's a tiny wrapper around `torch._inductor.aot_compile` that manages saving and lazy-loading the model as needed. It is meant to be used like:
```

```python
compiled_transformer = spaces.aoti_compile(exported_transformer)
```

This `compiled_transformer` is now an AoT-compiled binary ready to be used for inference. 

### 4. Using the compiled model in the pipeline

Now we need to bind our compiled transformer to our original pipeline, i.e., the `pipeline`.

A naive and almost working approach is to simply patch our pipeline like `pipe.transformer = compiled_transformer`. Unfortunately, this approach does not work because it deletes important attributes like `dtype`, `config`, etc. Only patching the `forward` method does not work well either because we are then keeping original model parameters in memory, often leading to OOM errors at runtime.

> `spaces` package provides a utility for this, too -- `spaces.aoti_apply`:

Reviewer 7: do we have docs/ GitHub for all of these utilities, it might make sense to link those in case people want to look into the code behind your wrappers a bit.

Reviewer 6: No, the package is `pyspaces` on GitHub but it's currently private. I think we will have to rely on the `pypi` explorer links.

```python
spaces.aoti_apply(compiled_transformer, pipeline.transformer)
```

> Et voilà! It will take care of patching `pipeline.transformer.forward` with our compiled model, as well as cleaning old model parameters out of memory.

Reviewer 2: how does it do it?

Reviewer 6: @cbensimon

I won't mind spending two sentences to explain what we're doing behind the scenes.

And we can then proceed with the rest of the steps as outlined above. Using quantization provides another XXYZ% of speedup.

### Dynamic shapes

Images and videos can come in different shapes and sizes. Hence, it’s important to also account for shape dynamism when performing AoT compilation. The primitives provided by `torch.export.export` make it easily configurable to provide what inputs should be treated accordingly for dynamic shapes, as shown below.

For the case of Flux.1-Dev transformer, changes in different image resolutions will affect two of its `forward` arguments: 

- `hidden_states`: The noisy input latents, which the transformer is supposed to denoise. It’s a 3D tensor, representing `batch_size, flattened_latent_dim, embed_dim`. When the batch size is fixed,  it’s the `flattened_latent_dim` that will change for any changes made to image resolutions.
- `img_ids`: A 2D array of encoded pixel coordinates having a shape of `height * width, 3`. In this case, we want to make `height * width` dynamic.

We start by defining a range in which we want to let the (latent) image resolutions vary:

```python

> transformer_hidden_dim = torch.export.Dim('hidden', min=4096, max=8212)

Reviewer 2: why 8212? (and not a power of two like the `min` value)

Reviewer 6: Same. I think it'd make sense to guide the readers a bit about how the `min` and `max` values were derived. I think it's particularly important because the process might vary from model to model. So, a bit of guidance here will set the foundations right.

```

We then define a map of argument names and which dimensions in their input values we expect to be dynamic:

```python
transformer_dynamic_shapes = {
    "hidden_dim": {1: transformer_hidden_dim}, 
    "img_ids", {0: transformer_hidden_dim}
}
```

Then we need to make our dynamic shapes object replicate the structure of our example inputs. The inputs that do not need dynamic shapes must bet set to `None`. This can be done very easily with PyTorch [tree_map](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/2f0de0ff9361ca4f2b1e6f9edbc600b5fb6abcd6/torch/utils/_pytree.py#L1341-L1373) utility:

```python
from pytorch.utils._pytree import tree_map

dynamic_shapes = tree_map(lambda v: None, call.kwargs)
dynamic_shapes |= transformer_dynamic_shapes
```

Now, when performing the export step, we simply supply `transformer_dynamic_shapes` to `torch.export.export`:

```python
exported_transformer = torch.export.export(
    pipeline.transformer,
    args=call.args,
    kwargs=call.kwargs,
    dynamic_shapes=dynamic_shapes,
)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is there a performance impact when using dynamic shapes?

Reviewer 6: Not much. So, worth not mentioning.

```python
from kernels import get_kernel

vllm_flash_attn3 = get_kernel("kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3")
```

It tries to load a kernel from the [`kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3`](https://huggingface.co/kernels-community/vllm-flash-attn3) repository, which is compatible with the current setup. Otherwise, it will error out due to incompatibility issues. Luckily for us, this works seamlessly on the ZeroGPU Spaces. This means we can leverage the power of FA3 on ZeroGPU, using the `kernels` library.

Here is a [fully working example of an FA3 attention processor](https://gist.github.com/sayakpaul/ff715f979793d4d44beb68e5e08ee067#file-fa3_qwen-py) for the Qwen-Image model.

## AoT compiled ZeroGPU Spaces demos

### Speedup comparison
- [FLUX.1-dev without AoTI](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/FLUX.1-dev-base)

> - [FLUX.1-dev with AoTI](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/FLUX.1-dev-fa3-aoti) (__1.75x__ speedup)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [FLUX.1-dev with AoTI and FA3](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/FLUX.1-dev-fa3-aoti) (__1.75x__ speedup)
```

Am I reading this right that the FA3 contribution makes it go from 1.7x (AOT) -> 1.75x (AOT+FA3)?

### Featured AoTI Spaces
- [FLUX.1 Kontext](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/FLUX.1-Kontext-Dev)
- [QwenImage Edit](https://huggingface.co/spaces/multimodalart/Qwen-Image-Edit-Fast)
- [Wan 2.2](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/wan2-2-fp8da-aoti-faster)
- [LTX Video](https://huggingface.co/spaces/zerogpu-aoti/ltx-dev-fast)

## Conclusion

ZeroGPU within Hugging Face Spaces is a powerful feature that enables AI builders by providing access to powerful compute. In this post, we showed how users can benefit from PyTorch’s ahead-of-time compilation techniques to speed up their applications that leverage ZeroGPU. We demonstrated speedups with Flux.1-Dev, but these techniques are not limited to just this model. Therefore, we encourage you to give these techniques a try and provide us with feedback.

## Resources

- Check out our [ZeroGPU-AOTI org on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/zerogpu-aoti) to refer to a collection of demos that leverage the techniques discussed in this post.

> - Browse `spaces.aoti_*` APIs [source code](https://pypi-browser.org/package/spaces/spaces-0.40.1-py3-none-any.whl/spaces/zero/torch/aoti.py) to learn more about the interface

Reviewer 6: Private for now.
